Document `PlayerLanguageService` (#787)
player-ui/player: docs/site/src/content/docs/authoring/lsp.mdx

You may interact with an LSP in the following ways:

- Use its [public properties](#public-properties)
- Call its [public functions](#public-functions-to-use)
- Tap into its [hooks](#hooks-to-tap)

## Public Properties

### `XLRService`

The XLR (Cross Language Representation) service that handles type information and transformations for Player Content. For more information on XLR, see the [XLR documentation](../xlr/intro).

Access the XLR service to add custom transforms or work with type definitions.

**Type:** `XLRService` (readonly)

**Example:** 

```typescript
lsp.XLRService.XLRSDK.hasType('InputAsset');
```

---

### `hooks`

An object containing all the tapable hooks that plugins can use to extend LSP functionality. See the [Hooks To Tap](#hooks-to-tap) and [Hooks To NOT Tap](#hooks-to-not-tap) sections for detailed information about each hook.

**Type:** Object with 6 hooks (readonly)
- `onDocumentUpdate`: SyncHook
- `validate`: AsyncParallelHook
- `onValidateEnd`: SyncWaterfallHook
- `complete`: AsyncParallelHook
- `hover`: SyncBailHook
- `definition`: SyncBailHook

> 

Reviewer: Having this then having the next section be the functions not hooks is a bit confusing

```typescript
import { LSPTransformsPlugin } from "@player-ui/language-service";

const config = {
  plugins: [
    new LSPTransformsPlugin({
      "exampleTransform1": exampleTransform1Fn,
      "exampleTransform2": exampleTransform2Fn,
    })
  ]
};
```

</Aside>

**Signature:**
```typescript
addXLRTransforms(transforms: Record<string, TransformFunction>): void
```

**Parameters:**
- `transforms`: An object mapping transform names to `TransformFunction`s. For more details on `TransformFunction`s, see the [XLR documentation](../xlr/concepts#transform-functions).

**Example:**
```typescript
lsp.addXLRTransforms({
  "exampleTransform1": exampleTransform1Fn,
  "exampleTransform2": exampleTransform2Fn,
});
```

---

### `setAssetTypes`

Loads type definitions from file paths on disk. These types define the complete set of assets and data types available for your Player project.

<Aside>

The `LSPAssetsPlugin` can be applied to the Player DSL/CLI config to achieve the same functionality. [Like this](https://github.com/player-ui/player/blob/2b9bd35adb632e7de010989b492c5fd1b8aebe9e/plugins/reference-assets/cli-preset/src/index.ts#L5-L16).

</Aside>

**Signature:**
```typescript

> setAssetTypes(typeFiles: Array<string>): Promise<void>

Author: Updated per what we talked about offline.

```

**Parameters:**
- `typeFiles`: Array of file paths to TypeScript definition files

**Example:**
```typescript
await lsp.setAssetTypes([
  "./types/custom-types.ts",
  "./types/plugin-types.ts"
]);
```

PlayerUI provides an excellent example of what a definition file looks like [here](https://github.com/player-ui/player/blob/main/core/types/src/index.ts).

---

### `setAssetTypesFromModule`

Loads type definitions from TypeScript manifests.

**Signature:**
```typescript
setAssetTypesFromModule(manifest: Array<TSManifest>): Promise<void>
```

**Parameters:**
- `manifest`: Array of TypeScript manifest objects containing type information

**Example:**
This example is taken directly from [the player-ui/tools repo tests](https://github.com/player-ui/tools/blob/ee81bb095147cf935f42cf7670b057086505db55/language/metrics-output-plugin/src/__tests__/metrics-output-plugin.test.ts#L380-L383).

```typescript
import {
  ReferenceAssetsWebPluginManifest,
  Types,
} from "@player-tools/static-xlrs";

await lsp.setAssetTypesFromModule([
  Types, 
  ReferenceAssetsWebPluginManifest
]);
```

> ## Public Functions To NOT Use

Author: Hmm, let me see if I can come up with a better label for them that conveys that  🤔

> ## Public Functions To NOT Use

Author: Updated

**Returns:** `Diagnostic[]`

**When Called:** At the end of `validateTextDocument()` after all validation and AST walking is complete

---

### `validate`

<Badge text="AsyncParallelHook" />

Called asynchronously in parallel to validate the document. Plugins can add validation rules, register AST visitors to walk the syntax tree, and report violations or diagnostics. All taps run in parallel.

**Parameters:**
1. `DocumentContext`: A `DocumentContext` object with:
   - `log` (Logger): Logger for messages
   - `document` (TextDocument): The underlying text document
   - `PlayerContent` (PlayerContent): The parsed Player Content AST
2. `ValidationContext`: A `ValidationContext` object with:
   - `addViolation` (function): Add a validation violation
     - Parameters: `(violation: Violation) => void`
   - `useASTVisitor` (function): Register an AST visitor to walk the syntax tree
     - Parameters: `(visitor: ASTVisitor) => void`
   - `addDiagnostic` (function): Add a diagnostic directly
     - Parameters: `(diagnostic: Diagnostic) => void`

**Returns:** `void`

**When Called:** During `validateTextDocument()` after syntax errors are collected

> ## Hooks To NOT Tap

Reviewer: Same question here, any particular reason not to call these?

Author: Makes sense. In your opinion, are these "hooks to not tap" vestigial or things we shouldn't document?

It seems to me like they are vestigial / not APIs we want people to use, but I am definitely missing the context of why they exist in the first place.

---
title: Player Language Service
---

import { Aside, Steps, Badge } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

The `PlayerLanguageService` is the foundation of all Player Content. It conforms to the Language Server Protocol standards, and the docs refer to this `PlayerLanguageService` as The LSP. The LSP parses JSON to a manipulable Abstract Syntax Tree (AST). It also provides features like Content validation.

> As a user of Player, you will not create your own LSP. The [Player CLI](../capabilities/cli) instantiates an LSP for you. Plugins that manipulate the LSP can be added to the Player CLI (i.e. DSL / CLI plugins). How to create and use DSL / CLI plugins is described in the [Plugins](./plugins) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a user of Player, you will typically not create your own LSP, rather you'll use one that already integrated into a tool. For example, the [Player CLI](../capabilities/cli) instantiates an LSP for use with content based operations. 

Plugins that manipulate the LSP can be added to the Player CLI. How to create and use DSL / CLI plugins is described in the [Plugins](./plugins) section.
```

> You may interact with an LSP (via a DSL / CLI plugin) in the following ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may interact with an LSP in the following ways:
```

DSL doesn't make a ton of context here because DSL plugins don't interact with the LSP, rather they interact with the DSL compiler.

**Example:**

```typescript
lsp.hooks.validate.tap("MyPlugin", (docContext, validationContext) => {
  // Add custom validation logic
});
```

## Hooks to Extend LSP Functionality

These are hooks that can be used to extend the LSP functionality.

### `onValidateEnd`

<Badge text="SyncWaterfallHook" />

Called synchronously after validation completes. Allows plugins to modify, filter, or add to the final list of diagnostics. Each tap receives the result of the previous tap (waterfall pattern).

**Parameters:**
1. `Diagnostic[]`: Array of diagnostics collected during validation
2. Object with:
   - `documentContext`: A `DocumentContext` object with:
     - `log` (Logger): Logger for messages
     - `document` (TextDocument): The underlying text document
     - `PlayerContent` (PlayerContent): The parsed Player Content AST
   - `addFixableViolation` (function): Callback to associate a fix with a diagnostic
     - Parameters: `(diag: Diagnostic, violation: Violation) => void`

**Returns:** `Diagnostic[]`

**When Called:** At the end of `validateTextDocument()` after all validation and AST walking is complete

---

### `validate`

<Badge text="AsyncParallelHook" />

> Called asynchronously in parallel to validate the document. Plugins can add validation rules, register AST visitors to walk the syntax tree, and report violations or diagnostics. All taps run in parallel.

Reviewer: Maybe mention here how to load content into the document?

Author: I have no idea what you're talking about. 😅 Could you expand?

<Aside>

The `LSPPluginPlugin` can be applied to the Player DSL/CLI config to achieve the same functionality. Like this:

```typescript
import { LSPPluginPlugin } from "@player-ui/language-service";

const config = {
  plugins: [
    new LSPPluginPlugin([customPlugin1, customPlugin2])
  ]
};
```

</Aside>

**Signature:**
```typescript
addLSPPlugin(plugin: PlayerLanguageServicePlugin): void
```

**Parameters:**
- `plugin`: A `PlayerLanguageServicePlugin` object with:
  - `name` (string): The name of the plugin
  - `apply(languageService: PlayerLanguageService)` (function): Function that receives the language service instance and applies the plugin's functionality

**Example:**
```typescript
lsp.addLSPPlugin({
  name: "MyCustomPlugin",
  apply(languageService: PlayerLanguageService) {
    languageService.hooks.validate.tap("MyCustomPlugin", (doc, ctx) => {
      // Custom validation logic
    });
  }
});
```

---

### `addXLRTransforms`

Adds custom XLR transform functions to the XLR service. For more information on XLR transforms, see the [XLR documentation](../xlr/concepts#transform-functions).

<Aside>

> The `LSPTransformsPlugin` can be applied to the Player DSL/CLI config to achieve the same functionality. Like this:

Reviewer: Same comment about the `LSPPluginPlugin`, the `LSPTransformsPlugin` is a CLI plugin, not an LSP plugin.

**Example:**
```typescript
lsp.addXLRTransforms({
  "exampleTransform1": exampleTransform1Fn,
  "exampleTransform2": exampleTransform2Fn,
});
```

---

### `setAssetTypes`

<Aside>

The `LSPAssetsPlugin` can be applied to the Player DSL/CLI config to achieve the same functionality. [Like this](https://github.com/player-ui/player/blob/2b9bd35adb632e7de010989b492c5fd1b8aebe9e/plugins/reference-assets/cli-preset/src/index.ts#L5-L16).

</Aside>

<Aside type="tip">

Use `setAssetTypesFromModule` instead of `setAssetTypes` if you are using this in a bundled application.

</Aside>

Loads type definitions from file paths on disk. These types define the complete set of assets and data types available for your Player project.

This function will:
- Load `/xlr/manifest.json` from the provided paths. E.g. if you provide `./example` as the path, it will load `./example/xlr/manifest.json`.
- If the path does NOT have `"types"` in the name, some default filters and transforms will be applied. They are defined [here](https://github.com/player-ui/tools/blob/ee81bb095147cf935f42cf7670b057086505db55/language/json-language-service/src/constants.ts#L29-L38).

> - If the path DOES have `"types"` in the name, these filters and transforms will NOT be applied.

Author: Updated. Is the new stuff correct?
